Add runtime release note for 2201.9.0 release (#8880)
ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website: downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/swan-lake-2201.9.0/RELEASE_NOTE.md

### New features

> #### Support to Provide Values for Configurable Variables through environment variables

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Support to provide values for configurable variables through environment variables
```

Configurable values can now be provided through environment variables using the following syntax.

```
BAL_CONFIG_VAR_key=value
```

> The key conforms to the structure  `org_module_variable`, where each part in the structured identifier is converted to uppercase, and dots are converted to underscores.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The key conforms to the structure `ORG_MODULE_VARIABLE`, where each part in the structured identifier is converted to uppercase, and dots are converted to underscores.
```

The environment variable-based configuration is supported for configurable variables with `boolean`, `int`, `float`, `decimal`, `string`, and `xml` types.

For example, if the configurable variable is defined in the following way,

```ballerina
configurable int port = ?;
```
The values can be provided through environment variables as follows.

If the configurable variable is defined in the default module or if a single Ballerina file is being used:

For Windows:
```
$ set BAL_CONFIG_VAR_PORT=9090
```
For Linux/macOS:
```
$ export BAL_CONFIG_VAR_PORT=9090
```
If the configurable variable is defined in a different module of the same organization:

> For Windows:

Reviewer: `For Windows` is not adding in a new line. Add a line break before this.

> For Windows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the configurable variable is defined in a different module of the same organization:

For Windows:
```

```
$ set BAL_CONFIG_VAR_MODULENAME_PORT=9090
```

> For Linux/macOS:

Reviewer 2: ```` suggestion
```

For Linux/macOS:
````

```
$ export BAL_CONFIG_VAR_MODULENAME_PORT=9090
```
If the configurable variable is defined in a module of a different organization.

> For Windows:

Reviewer: `For Windows` is not adding in a new line. Add a line break before this.

> For Windows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the configurable variable is defined in a module of a different organization.

For Windows:
```

```
$ set BAL_CONFIG_VAR_ORGNAME_MODULENAME_PORT=9090
```

> For Linux/macOS:

Reviewer 2: ```` suggestion
```

For Linux/macOS:
````

```
$ export BAL_CONFIG_VAR_ORGNAME_MODULENAME_PORT=9090
```

#### New Runtime Java APIs

> ##### Java APIs to parse a json string to a target type

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### Java APIs to parse a JSON string to a target type
```

> A new optimized API is introduced in `ValueUtils`  to parse a given input stream and create a value using a subtype of `json` given by the target type. The user needs to close the provided input stream.

Reviewer 2: ``` suggestion
A new optimized API is introduced in `ValueUtils` to parse a given input stream and create a value using a subtype of `json` given by the target type. The user needs to close the provided input stream.
```

```java
public static Object parse(InputStream in, Type targetType) throws BError{

> };

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
public static Object parse(InputStream in, Type targetType) throws BError {
};
```

```

##### Java APIs to provide information about runtime artifacts

New runtime Java APIs are added to provide information about the active runtime artifacts.

```java
public List<Artifact> getArtifacts();
```

> This returns a list of artifact instances that represent the services at runtime. An artifact instance contains a name (service name), type (only service is supported now), and a details map. The details enclose the following information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This returns a list of artifact instances that represent the services at runtime. An artifact instance contains a name (service name), type (only `service` is supported now), and a map of details. The details enclose the following information.
```

- `listeners` - a list of listener objects attached to the service
- `attachPoint` - the attach point specified in the service declaration (for example, `basePath` in HTTP)
- `service` - the service object

```java
public Node getNode();
```

> This returns a node instance that represents the Ballerina runtime node. A node instance contains a nodeId (self-generated unique ID), and a map of details. The details enclose the following information.
> - `balVersion` - The Ballerina version

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This returns a node instance that represents the Ballerina runtime node. A node instance contains a nodeId (self-generated unique ID), and a map of details. The details enclose the following information.

- `balVersion` - The Ballerina version
```

- `balHome` - The path of Ballerina home
- `osName` - Name of the Operating System
- `osVersion` - Version of the Operating System

The above APIs can be called from a Ballerina environment instance. Similar to this,

```java 
import io.ballerina.runtime.api.Artifact;
import io.ballerina.runtime.api.Environment;
import io.ballerina.runtime.api.Node;

Repository repository = env.getRepository();
List<Artifact> artifacts = repository.getArtifacts();
Node node = repository.getNode();
```

##### Java APIs to start a new runtime and invoke a Ballerina function
Java APIs are introduced to start a new Ballerina runtime instance for a given module and perform function invocations within the module by calling the module initialization and module start methods sequentially before any other function calls. It is recommended to call the module stop method to gracefully shut down the Ballerina runtime at the end of the program.

```java
import io.ballerina.runtime.api.Runtime;

Runtime balRuntime = Runtime.from(module);
balRuntime.init();
balRuntime.start();
balRuntime.invokeMethodAsync(“functionName”, callback, args);
balRuntime.stop();
```

### Improvements

> #### Support mapping of resource and remote function parameters to BArray parameter of a generic native method

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Support mapping of resource and remote function parameters to `BArray` parameter of a generic native method
```

> A new way has been introduced to support the binding of any resource or remote function to a generic native method, regardless of the function parameters. The generic native method should be defined with a `BArray` parameter, which represents all the parameters excluding path parameters (Path parameters need to be handled separately with a `BArray` parameter and it is supported from 2201.5.0). To avoid errors due to overloaded methods, it is recommended to define parameter type constraints as well.

Reviewer: `and it is supported from 2201.5.0)` seems a sentence fragment with no opening bracket as well.

> eg:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
E.g.:
```

- `listeners` - a list of listener objects attached to the service
- `attachPoint` - the attach point specified in the service declaration (for example, `basePath` in HTTP)
- `service` - the service object

```java
public Node getNode();
```

This returns a node instance that represents the Ballerina runtime node. A node instance contains a nodeId (self-generated unique ID), and a map of details. The details enclose the following information.
- `balVersion` - The Ballerina version
- `balHome` - The path of Ballerina home
- `osName` - Name of the Operating System
- `osVersion` - Version of the Operating System

The above APIs can be called from a Ballerina environment instance. Similar to this,

```java 
import io.ballerina.runtime.api.Artifact;
import io.ballerina.runtime.api.Environment;
import io.ballerina.runtime.api.Node;

Repository repository = env.getRepository();
List<Artifact> artifacts = repository.getArtifacts();
Node node = repository.getNode();
```

> ##### Java APIs to start a new runtime and invoke a Ballerina function
> Java APIs are introduced to start a new Ballerina runtime instance for a given module and perform function invocations within the module by calling the module initialization and module start methods sequentially before any other function calls. It is recommended to call the module stop method to gracefully shut down the Ballerina runtime at the end of the program.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
##### Java APIs to start a new runtime and invoke a Ballerina function

Java APIs are introduced to start a new Ballerina runtime instance for a given module and perform function invocations within the module by calling the module initialization and module start methods sequentially before any other function calls. It is recommended to call the module stop method to gracefully shut down the Ballerina runtime at the end of the program.
```

```java
import io.ballerina.runtime.api.Runtime;

Runtime balRuntime = Runtime.from(module);
balRuntime.init();
balRuntime.start();
balRuntime.invokeMethodAsync(functionName, callback, args);
balRuntime.stop();
```

### Improvements

> #### Support mapping of resource and remote function parameters to `BArray` parameter of a generic native method
> A new way has been introduced to support the binding of any resource or remote function to a generic native method, regardless of the function parameters. The generic native method should be defined with a `BArray` parameter, which represents all the parameters excluding path parameters (Handling path parameters in a similar manner is supported from 2201.5.0). To avoid errors due to overloaded methods, it is recommended to define parameter type constraints as well.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Support mapping of resource and remote function parameters to `BArray` parameter of a generic native method

A new way has been introduced to support the binding of any resource or remote function to a generic native method, regardless of the function parameters. The generic native method should be defined with a `BArray` parameter, which represents all the parameters excluding path parameters (Handling path parameters in a similar manner is supported from 2201.5.0). To avoid errors due to overloaded methods, it is recommended to define parameter type constraints as well.
```

E.g.:

> ```ballerina

Reviewer 2: ```` suggestion
The following Ballerina external function,
```ballerina
````

isolated resource function get abc/[int p1]/[string p2]/[string p3]/[int ...p4] (string s, int i, typedesc<anydata> targetType = <>) = @java:Method {
    'class: "javalibs.app.App",
    name: "getResource",
    paramTypes: ["io.ballerina.runtime.api.values.BObject", "io.ballerina.runtime.api.values.BArray", "io.ballerina.runtime.api.values.BString"]
} external;
```

> ```java

Reviewer 2: ```` suggestion
can be mapped to the following Java method.

```java
````

- `listeners` - a list of listener objects attached to the service
- `attachPoint` - the attach point specified in the service declaration (for example, `basePath` in HTTP)
- `service` - the service object

```java
public Node getNode();
```

This returns a node instance that represents the Ballerina runtime node. A node instance contains a nodeId (self-generated unique ID), and a map of details. The details enclose the following information.
- `balVersion` - The Ballerina version
- `balHome` - The path of Ballerina home
- `osName` - Name of the Operating System
- `osVersion` - Version of the Operating System

The above APIs can be called from a Ballerina environment instance. Similar to this,

```java 
import io.ballerina.runtime.api.Artifact;
import io.ballerina.runtime.api.Environment;
import io.ballerina.runtime.api.Node;

Repository repository = env.getRepository();
List<Artifact> artifacts = repository.getArtifacts();
Node node = repository.getNode();
```

##### Java APIs to start a new runtime and invoke a Ballerina function

> Java APIs are introduced to start a new Ballerina runtime instance for a given module and perform function invocations within the module by calling the module initialization and module start methods sequentially before any other function calls. It is recommended to call the module stop method to gracefully shut down the Ballerina runtime at the end of the program.

Author: Yes, it'll call the generated `$moduleStart` method.

### New features

#### Support to provide values for configurable variables through environment variables

Configurable values can now be provided through environment variables using the following syntax.

> 

Reviewer 3: through or via?

```
BAL_CONFIG_VAR_key=value
```

> The key conforms to the structure `ORG_MODULE_VARIABLE`, where each part in the structured identifier is converted to uppercase, and dots are converted to underscores.

Reviewer 3: structured or unique?

> The environment variable-based configuration is supported for configurable variables of `boolean`, `int`, `float`, `decimal`, `string`, and `xml` types.

Reviewer 3: Shall we move this to the end? Breaks the flow right now, IMO.

For example, if the configurable variable is defined in the following way,

```ballerina
configurable int port = ?;
```

The values can be provided through environment variables as follows.

If the configurable variable is defined in the default module or if a single Ballerina file is being used:

For Windows:
```
$ set BAL_CONFIG_VAR_PORT=9090
```

For Linux/macOS:
```
$ export BAL_CONFIG_VAR_PORT=9090
```

If the configurable variable is defined in a different module with name `foo.bar` from the same organization:

For Windows:
```
$ set BAL_CONFIG_VAR_FOO_BAR_PORT=9090
```

For Linux/macOS:
```
$ export BAL_CONFIG_VAR_FOO_BAR_PORT=9090

> ```

Reviewer 3: Do we have to repeat both for all examples? IMO, we can just mention what the key will be.

If the configurable variable is defined in a module with name `foo.bar` from a different organization called `testOrg`.

For Windows:
```
$ set BAL_CONFIG_VAR_TESTORG_FOO_BAR_PORT=9090
```

For Linux/macOS:
```
$ export BAL_CONFIG_VAR_TESTORG_FOO_BAR_PORT=9090

> ```

Reviewer 3: Shouldn't we add a note on what takes priority if specified in multiple ways (Config file, command argument, etc.)

#### New Runtime Java APIs

##### Java APIs to parse a JSON string to a target type

A new optimized API is introduced in `ValueUtils` to parse a given input stream and create a value using a subtype of `json` given by the target type. The user needs to close the provided input stream.

```java
public static Object parse(InputStream in, Type targetType) throws BError {
};
```

##### Java APIs to provide information about runtime artifacts

New runtime Java APIs are added to provide information about the active runtime artifacts.

```java
public List<Artifact> getArtifacts();
```

This returns a list of artifact instances that represent the services at runtime. An artifact instance contains a name (service name), type (only `service` is supported now), and a map of details. The map of details includes the following information.

> - `listeners` - a list of listener objects attached to the service

Reviewer 3: Services are attached to listeners, not the other way around.

> - `attachPoint` - the attach point specified in the service declaration (for example, `basePath` in HTTP)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `attachPoint` - the attach point specified in the service declaration (for example, base path in HTTP)
```

- `service` - the service object

```java
public Node getNode();
```

> This returns a node instance that represents the Ballerina runtime node. A node instance contains a node ID (`nodeId` - a unique generated ID), and a map of details. The map of details includes the following information.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This returns a node instance that represents the Ballerina runtime node. A node instance contains a node ID (`nodeId` - a unique generated ID) and a map of details. The map of details includes the following information.
```

- `balVersion` - The Ballerina version
- `balHome` - The path of Ballerina home

> - `osName` - Name of the Operating System
> - `osVersion` - Version of the Operating System

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `osName` - Name of the operating system
- `osVersion` - Version of the operating system
```

The above APIs can be called via a Ballerina environment instance as follows.

```java 
import io.ballerina.runtime.api.Artifact;
import io.ballerina.runtime.api.Environment;
import io.ballerina.runtime.api.Node;

Repository repository = env.getRepository();
List<Artifact> artifacts = repository.getArtifacts();
Node node = repository.getNode();
```

##### Java APIs to start a new runtime and invoke a Ballerina function

Java APIs are introduced to start a new Ballerina runtime instance for a given module and perform function invocations within the module by calling the module initialization and module start methods sequentially before any other function calls. It is recommended to call the module stop method to gracefully shut down the Ballerina runtime at the end of the program.

```java
import io.ballerina.runtime.api.Runtime;

Runtime balRuntime = Runtime.from(module);
balRuntime.init();
balRuntime.start();
balRuntime.invokeMethodAsync(functionName, callback, args);
balRuntime.stop();
```

### Improvements

> #### Support mapping of resource and remote function parameters to `BArray` parameter of a generic native method

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Support mapping of resource and remote method parameters to `BArray` parameter of a generic native method
```

Update the description too.

> A new way has been introduced to support the binding of any resource or remote function to a generic native method, regardless of the function parameters. The generic native method should be defined with a `BArray` parameter, which represents all the parameters excluding path parameters (Handling path parameters in a similar manner is supported from 2201.5.0). To avoid errors due to overloaded methods, it is recommended to define parameter type constraints as well.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A new way has been introduced to support the binding of any resource or remote function to a generic native method, regardless of the function parameters. The generic native method should be defined with a `BArray` parameter, which represents all the parameters excluding path parameters (handling path parameters in a similar manner is supported from 2201.5.0). To avoid errors due to overloaded methods, it is recommended to define parameter type constraints as well.
```

### New features

#### Support to provide values for configurable variables via environment variables

Configurable values can now be provided through environment variables using the following syntax.

```
BAL_CONFIG_VAR_key=value
```

The key conforms to the structure `ORG_MODULE_VARIABLE`, where each part in the unique identifier is converted to uppercase, and dots are converted to underscores.

For example, if the configurable variable is defined in the following way,

```ballerina
configurable int port = ?;
```

The values can be provided through environment variables as follows.

- If the configurable variable is defined in the default module or if a single Ballerina file is being used, the expected environment variable will be `BAL_CONFIG_VAR_PORT`.

> - If the configurable variable is defined in a different module with name `foo.bar` from the same organization, the expected environment variable will be `BAL_CONFIG_VAR_FOO_BAR_PORT`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If the configurable variable is defined in a different module with the name `foo.bar` from the same organization, the expected environment variable will be `BAL_CONFIG_VAR_FOO_BAR_PORT.`
```

> - If the configurable variable is defined in a module with name `foo.bar` from a different organization called `testOrg`, the expected environment variable will be `BAL_CONFIG_VAR_TESTORG_FOO_BAR_PORT`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If the configurable variable is defined in a module with the name `foo.bar` from a different organization called `testOrg`, the expected environment variable will be `BAL_CONFIG_VAR_TESTORG_FOO_BAR_PORT`.
```

- `balVersion` - The Ballerina version
- `balHome` - The path of Ballerina home
- `osName` - Name of the operating system
- `osVersion` - Version of the operating system

The above APIs can be called via a Ballerina environment instance as follows.

```java 
import io.ballerina.runtime.api.Artifact;
import io.ballerina.runtime.api.Environment;
import io.ballerina.runtime.api.Node;

Repository repository = env.getRepository();
List<Artifact> artifacts = repository.getArtifacts();
Node node = repository.getNode();
```

##### Java APIs to start a new runtime and invoke a Ballerina function

Java APIs are introduced to start a new Ballerina runtime instance for a given module and perform function invocations within the module by calling the module initialization and module start methods sequentially before any other function calls. It is recommended to call the module stop method to gracefully shut down the Ballerina runtime at the end of the program.

```java
import io.ballerina.runtime.api.Runtime;

Runtime balRuntime = Runtime.from(module);
balRuntime.init();
balRuntime.start();
balRuntime.invokeMethodAsync(functionName, callback, args);
balRuntime.stop();
```

### Improvements

> #### Support mapping of resource and remote method parameters to `BArray` parameter of a generic native method

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Support mapping of resource and remote method parameters to `BArray` parameters of a generic native method
```

> A new way has been introduced to support the binding of any resource or remote function to a generic native method, regardless of the function parameters. The generic native method should be defined with a `BArray` parameter, which represents all the parameters excluding path parameters (handling path parameters in a similar manner is supported from 2201.5.0). To avoid errors due to overloaded methods, it is recommended to define parameter type constraints as well.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A new way has been introduced to support the binding of any resource or remote method to a generic native method, regardless of the function parameters. The generic native method should be defined with a `BArray` parameter, which represents all the parameters excluding path parameters (handling path parameters in a similar manner is supported from 2201.5.0). To avoid errors due to overloaded methods, it is recommended to define parameter type constraints as well.
```

generic native  or generic Java?

E.g.,

> The following Ballerina resource method,

Reviewer 3: Please add new lines as appropriate.

> E.g.,
> The following Ballerina resource method,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, the following Ballerina resource method,
```

    }
    ```

> - To avoid clashes with Java identifiers, the character `$` which is used for encoding and decoding identifiers has been replaced by the character `&`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Runtime changes

- To avoid clashes with Java identifiers, the character used for encoding and decoding identifiers has been changed from `$` to `&`.
```

We'll be doing the same for others in https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/pull/8876/files.
